道德经，Dao De Jing
老子，Laozi

Chapter 1

道可道，The Tao that can be described
非常道，is not the eternal Tao.
名可名，The name that can be spoken
非常名，is not the eternal name.

无名天地之始，The nameless is the boundary of Heaven and Earth.
有名万物之母，The named is the mother of Creation.

故常无欲以观其妙，Freed from desire, you can see the hidden mystery.
常有欲以观其徼，By having desire, you can only see what is visibly real.

此两者，Yet mystery and reality
同出而异名，emerge from the same source.
同谓之玄，The source is called Tao.

玄之又玄，Darkness and deepness.
众妙之门，The beginning of every things.

Chapter 2

天下皆知美之为美，When people see things as beautiful,
斯恶已，ugliness is created.
皆知善之为善，When people see things as good,
斯不善已，evil is created.

故有无相生，Being and non-being produce each other.
难易相成，Difficult and easy complement each other.
长短相较，Long and short define each other.
高下相倾，High and low oppose each other.
音声相和，Sound and voice combine each other.
前后相随，Fore and aft follow each other.

是以圣人，Therefore the Master
处无为之事，can change without doing anything
行不言之教，and teach without saying a word.
万物作焉而不辞，Things come and leave without stopping by her.
生而不有，She has and does not possess,
为而不恃，acts and does not expect.
功成而弗居，When her work is done, she takes no credits.
夫唯弗居是以不去，That is why she will last forever.

Chapter 3

不尚贤，If you overly esteem talented individuals,
使民不争，people will become overly competitive.
不贵难得之货，If you overvalue possessions,
使民不为盗，people will begin to steal.
不见可欲，If you show off your treasures,
使民心不乱，people will become envious.

是以圣人之治，What the Master do is
虚其心，humbling people's minds;
实其腹，filling their bellies,
弱其志，softening their prides,
强其骨，fortifying their bodies.
常使民无知无欲，Preferring simplicity and freedom from desires,
使夫智者不敢为也，avoiding the pitfalls of knowledge and wrong action.

为无为，For those who practice naturally,
则无不治，everything will fit into place.

Chapter 4

道，The Tao is like a black hole,
冲而用之或不盈，it can never be emptied and can never be filled.
渊兮似万物之宗，Infinitely deep, it is the source of all things.
挫其锐解其纷，It dulls the sharp, unties the knotted,
和其光同其尘，shades the light, dusts the great.

湛兮似或存，It is hidden but always being there.
吾不知谁之子，I don't know who gave birth to it.
象帝之先，It is older than the concept of God.

Chapter 5
天地不仁，The Heaven and Earth are unconscious;
以万物为刍狗，they regard everyone as insignificant.
圣人不仁，The Master doesn't take sides;
以百姓为刍狗，she treats everyone impartial.

天地之间其犹橐a乎，Between Heaven and Earth, the space is like a bellows;
虚而不屈，it seems useless, because it has not shown its power.
动而愈出，When it is used, lots of air it produces;

多言数穷，The more you talk of it, the less you comprehend.
不如守中，It is better not to speak of things you do not understand.

Chapter 6

谷神不死，The spirit of Tao is immortal.
是谓玄牝，It is called the Great Mother
玄牝之门是谓天地根，because it gives birth to Heaven and Earth.

绵绵若存，It is like a vapor, barely seen but exists.
用之不勤，Being used endlessly.

Chapter 7
# 道（Tao）->天地（Heaven and Earth） ->圣人（Master）
# 天地更似Universe，后面有“天得一，地得一”，所以还是用Heaven and Earth

天长地久，The Heaven and Earth are eternal.
天地所以能长且久者，Why are they long enduring?
以其不自生，They do not live for themselves;
故能长生，they are here for all beings.

是以圣人后其身，The Master puts herself last;
则身先，And finds herself in the place of authority.
外其身，She detaches herself from all things;
而身存，Therefore she is united with all things.

非以其无私邪，She treats everything selflessly,
故能成其私，and is content with herself.

Chapter 8

上善若水，The Tao is like water,
水善万物而不争，which benefits all creatures silently.
处众人之所恶，Only water be willing to gather in unfavorable pit,
故几于道，it is similar to the Tao.

居善地，Dwelling in good place.
心善渊，Thinking with good intention.
与善仁，Working in good mood.
言善信，Talking with good reputation.
政善治，Administering in good government.
事善能，Performing with good plans.
动善时，Acting in good timing.

夫唯不争，Only when there is no competition
故无尤，will we all live in peace.

Chapter 9

持而盈之，When the cup is filling,
不如其已，it is  better to stop at the brim.
揣而锐之，When the honed knife is using,
不可长保，it is more difficult to keep it sharp.
金玉满堂，When you possess a lot of wealth,
莫之能守，it is harder to protect.
富贵而骄，When you are pompous of your treasure,
自遗其咎，it will bring more troubles.

功遂身退，When you have accomplished your goal simply walk away.
天之道，This is the Zen of Heaven.

Chapter 10

载营魄抱一，Nurturing your soul and spirit as a whole,
能无离乎，can them be separated?
专气致柔，Focusing your breath until your body supple,
能婴儿乎，can you feel like a newborn baby?
涤除玄览，Cleansing your inner thought,
能无疵乎，will you found any weakness?
爱民治国，Loving people and leading them,
能无知乎，can you do it naturally without forcing?
天门开阖，Heaven giving and taking away,
能无雌乎，can you accept that quietly?
明白四达，Understanding all things,
能无为乎，will you leave the worlds as they are without changing?

生之畜之，Giving birth and nourishing,
生而不有，bringing without possessing,
为而不恃，doing without expecting,
长而不宰，accompanying without controlling,
是谓玄德，this is the highest virtue.

Chapter 11

三十辐共一毂，A wheel has thirty spokes,
当其无，because they are placed in even gaps,
有车之用，that allows the wheel to function.

埏埴以为器，We mold clay into a bowl,
当其无，because it is concave,
有器之用，that makes the bowl useful.

凿户牖以为室，We fashion wood for a hut,
当其无，because it is the emptiness inside,
有室之用，that makes it dwelling.

故有之以为利，So we work sometimes with things united,
无之以为用，sometimes with things divided.

Chapter 12

五色令人目盲，Five colors blind the eye.
五音令人耳聋，Five notes deafen the ear.
五味令人口爽，Five flavors make the palate go stale.
驰骋田猎令人心发狂，Too much hunting derange the mind.
难得之货令人行妨，Too valuable goods cause crime.

是以圣人为腹不为目，The Master prefers the inner mind than the outer feelings.
故去彼取此，She seeks the former and shuns the latter.

Chapter 13

宠辱若惊，Success is as dangerous as failure,
贵大患若身，we are our own greatest enemy.

何谓宠辱若惊，Why say success is as dangerous as failure?
宠为上辱为下，You think success is good and failure is bad.
得之若惊失之若惊，Either success or failure changes mood drastically。
是谓宠辱若惊，That is meaning that success is as dangerous as failure.

何谓贵大患若身，Why say we are our own greatest enemy?
吾所以有患者为吾有身，The reason is I care too much to myself.
及吾无身吾有何患，If I no longer thought too much of myself, I will not have weakness.

故贵以身为天下若可寄天下，Treat the whole world as yourself, you can be entrusted.
爱以身为天下若可托天下，Love the whole world as yourself, you can be confided.

Chapter 14

视之不见名曰夷，Looking for it, and it can't be seen.
听之不闻名曰希，Listening to it, and it can't be heard.
搏之不得名曰微，Grasping for it , and it can't be caught.
此三者不可致诘，These three cannot be further discriminated,
故混而为一，so we treat them as one.

其上不，Its top is bright but not shining.
其下不昧，Its bottom is gloomy but not dark.
绳绳兮不可名，It runs continually without a name,
复归于无物，and returns to nothingness.
是谓无状之状，It is seem as formless forms
无物之象， or imageless images.
是谓惚恍，It is subtle and beyond all understanding.

迎之不见其首，Approach it and you will not see the beginning.
随之不见其后，Follow it and you will not see the ending.
执古之道，It comes from ancient era,
以御今之有，we still can use it today.
能知古始，Knowing the origin,
是谓道纪，you begin to understand the rule of Tao.

Chapter 15

古之善为士者，The old prophets who followed the Tao
微妙玄通，were mysterious, subtle, and profound.
深不可识，Their wisdom was beyond our comprehension.
夫唯不可识，Because their wisdom was so superior,
故强为之容，I can only give a shallow description.

豫兮若冬涉川，Someone was careful as crossing ice sheet in winter.
犹兮若畏四邻，Someone was vigilant as being surrounded by enemies.
俨兮其若客，Someone was courteous as a new coming guest.
涣兮若冰之将释，Someone was relaxed as hearing ice-thawing sound .
敦兮其若朴，Someone was steadfast as hard fibrous woods.
旷兮其若谷，Someone was open-minded as a wide valley.
混兮其若浊，Someone was conservative as turbid water.

孰能浊以止，How to divide the mudded water?
静之徐清，Settle it and it will be clear slowly.
孰能安以久，How to develop the stagnant water?
动之徐生，Run it and it will be changed slowly.

保此道者不欲盈，The prophets following Tao don't feel satisfied.
夫唯不盈，For those who are not satisfied
故能蔽而新成，will brings new thought and find new way.

Chapter 16

致虚极，If you can empty your mind,
守静笃，your heart will embrace the tranquility.
万物并作，Watching the activities of all creatures,
吾以观复，you can see the circle of their moving.

夫物芸芸，All creatures in the universe
各复归其根，will return to their source finally.
归根曰静，Returning to the source is done quietly,
是谓复命，because it is the destiny defined by Tao.

复命曰常，Returning to the destiny is called 'constant'.
知常曰明，Knowing the constant is called 'enlightenment'.
不知常，Not knowing the constant
妄作曰凶，will cause unfavorable result.

知常容，Knowing the constant will help us calm.
容乃公，Calmness will lead us impartial.
公乃王，Impartiality will support our administration.
王乃天，Our administration conforms the rule of Heaven.
天乃道，The rule of Heaven is as same as Tao.
道乃久，Only Tao can last forever.
没身不殆，We spend our whole life to follow the Tao.

Chapter 17

太上下知有之，The best leader is heard and not affects people's life.
其次亲而誉之，The next best is a leader who is loved and praised.
其次畏之，Next comes the one who is feared.
其次侮之，The worst one is the leader that is despised.

信不足焉，If a leader is not trustworthy,
有不信焉，people will not trust him.

悠兮其贵言，The best leader doesn't say much about his work.
功成事遂，When he has achieved his goals,
百姓皆谓我自然，people think they choose their lives themselves.

Chapter 18

大道废，When the great Tao is hided,
有仁义，we substitute that with charity and righteousness.
智慧出，When people become cleverer,
有大伪，hypocrisy comes into being.

六亲不和，When the family members combat each other,
有孝慈，people emphasize on term of affection.
国家昏乱，When the country falls into chaos,
有忠臣，politicians talk about patriotism.

Chapter 19

绝圣弃智，Not confined by knowledge and wisdom,
民利百倍，people will be a hundred times better.
绝仁弃义，Not misled by the dogma of charity and righteousness,
民复孝慈，people will find true spirit of affection.
绝巧弃利，Not overestimate the opportunity and profit,
盗贼无有，people will not be as greed as thieves.

此三者以为文不足，These three cannot be described strikingly,
故令有所属，so we extract the main points.

见素抱朴，Deep meditation and simple life.
少私寡欲，Less selfishness and less desire.

Chapter 20

绝学无忧，Free from the mundane knowledge.
唯之与阿相去几何，What is the range between yes and no?
善之与恶相去若何，What is the range between good and evil?
人之所畏不可不畏，Fear what others fear.

荒兮其未央哉，The Tao is spacious like no limitation.

众人熙熙，Others are joyous,
如享太牢，as attending a festival,
如春登台，as going a pleasure trip at spring.
我独泊兮其未兆，Only I immerge into my own world,
如婴儿之未孩，like a baby in the innocent age.
褓馊粑匏归，Depressed and not find the home.

众人皆有馀，Others happily get what they want,
而我独若遗，Only I feel deserted.
我愚人之心也哉，What a fool am I,
沌沌兮，as living in the chaos.

俗人昭昭，Ordinary people are knowledgeable.
我独昏昏，Only I feel ignorant.
俗人察察，Ordinary people are deliberate,
我独闷闷，Only I feel confused.

澹兮其若海，I am like drifting on the undulating ocean,
f兮若无止，blown by the endless wind.
众人皆有以，Other people have their goals,
而我独顽似鄙，Only I insist on fumbling.

我独异于人，I am different from ordinary people.
而贵食母，I cherish myself who grope the path of Tao.

Chapter 21

孔德之容，What does the greatest virtue like.
惟道是从，It is the incarnation of the Tao.
道之为物，How to decipher the Tao,
惟恍惟惚，It is elusive and inscrutable.

惚兮恍兮，Though the Tao is elusive,
其中有象，there is some truth we can perceive.
恍兮惚兮，Though the Tao is inscrutable,
其中有物，there is some common sense in all creatures.
窈兮冥兮，In the secluded and dark places, 
其中有精，there are the things as spiritual atoms.
其精甚真，These spiritual atoms are genuine,
其中有信，you can prove if you believe that.

自古及今，From the Big Bang to now,
其名不去，the Tao is being here.
以阅众甫，It is embodied in the whole world.

吾何以知众甫之状哉，How do I know the creatures of the world?
以此，I analyze using the Tao.

Chapter 22
 
曲则全，Things fragmentary may be united as a whole.
枉则直，Things twisted may be reshaped to straight.
洼则盈，Things concaved may be filled to full.
敝则新，Things old may be changed to new.
少则得，Somebody poor may be given.
多则惑，Somebody rich may be confused about what he wants.

是以圣人抱一为天下式，So the Master steadily follow the Tao.
不自见故明，She is a saint but not self-centered.
不自是故彰，She is a paragon but not flattered.
不自伐故有功，She is ideal but not pompous.
不自矜故长，She is immortal but not conceited.

夫唯不争，Not to counter the natural tendency,
故天下莫能与之争，you will not have unconquerable opponents in the world.

古之所谓曲则全者，The proverbs of "fragmentary tending to a whole"
岂虚言哉，are not useless words.
诚全而归之，Executing heartily you are on the way of Tao.

Chapter 23

希言自然，Let's talk a little about the nature:
故飘风不终朝，The wild wind will not last a long time.
骤雨不终日，The tempest will not sweep all the day.
孰为此者，What causes those things so transient? 
天地，Heaven and Earth.

天地尚不能久，Even Heaven and Earth are passing quickly,
而况于人乎，we humans are also ephemeral.

故从事于道者同于道，Someone seeks the truth of the Tao.
德者同于德，Someone leads a life of virtue.
失者同于失，Someone plays around and loses themselves.

同于道者，If you seek the truth of the Tao.,
道亦乐得之，the Tao will eagerly welcome you.
同于德者，If you lead a life of virtue,
德亦乐得之，the Virtue will be a part of you.
同于失者，If you play around and lost,
失亦乐得之，the Lost will refer to you.

信不足焉，If you are not trustworthy,
有不信焉，people will not trust you.

Chapter 24

企者不立，Who stands on tiptoes can't stand firmly.
跨者不行，Who takes strides can't run a long distance.
自见者不明，Who self-centered isn't wise.
自是者不彰，Who flattered isn't sagacious.
自伐者无功，Who pompous is meritless.
自矜者不长，Who conceited is transient.

其在道也，In the words of the Tao,
曰馀食赘行，those attitudes are called overmuch.
物或恶之，People may despise those.
故有道者不处，We who follow the Tao will not do.

Chapter 25

有物混成，Some thing grows in the chaos,
先天地生，before the creation of Heaven and Earth.
寂兮寥兮，It is alone and reclusive,
独立不改，solitary and unchanging.
周行而不殆，It is moving regularly and perpetually.
可以为天下母，It may be regarded as the Mother of the universe.
吾不知其名，I do not know its name,
字之曰道，I call it the Tao.
强为之名，If forced to give it a title,
曰大，I would call it 'Great'.

大曰逝，Being great means it scatters everywhere.
逝曰远，Scattering everywhere means it reaches extremity.
远曰返，Reaching extremity means it returns the origin.

故道大，So the Tao is great.
天大，Heaven is great.
地大，Earth is great.
王亦大，Human government is great.
域中有四大，These are four great things in the universe.
而王居其一焉，Human government is one of them.

人法地，Humanity imitate the rules of the Earth.
地法天，Earth imitate the rules of the Heaven.
天法道，Heaven imitate the rules of the Tao.
道法自然，The Tao is Nature itself.

Chapter 26

重为轻根，Rigorousness is the premise of leniency.
静为躁君，Calmness is the bridle of tumult.

是以圣人终日，Thus the Master handles everything
行不离辎重，remembering her responsibility.
虽有荣观，Even though she is at a high level,
燕处超然，she is impartial and serene.

奈何万乘之主，Why is a lord of a thousand chariots
而以身轻天下，so foolish to look down on the world.
轻则失本，Frivolousness will lose significant parts.
躁则失君，Irritableness will lose the control of yourself.

Chapter 27

善行无辙迹，A good traveler leaves no tracks.
善言无瑕谪，An excellent debater leavers no weaknesses.
善数不用筹策，A good accountant works without calculators.
善闭无关楗而不可开，A designed enclosure is difficult to open if not having keys.
善结无绳约而不可解，A complicated knot is difficult to unravel regardless of its textures.

是以圣人常善救人，Thus the Master is skillful to help people.
故无弃人，She doesn't desert people and accepts all types of characters.
常善救物，She is skillful to use goods.
故无弃物，She doesn't abandon goods and thinks each serviceable.
是谓袭明，This is called implicit intelligence.

故善人者不善人之师，So a talented person can be an untalented person's teacher.
不善人者善人之资，An untalented person can raise problems to a talented person.
不贵其师不爱其资，If you fail to honor your teachers or cherish your students,
虽智大迷，you will become disoriented no matter how smart you are.
是谓要妙，It is the most important idea.

Chapter 28

知其雄守其雌，Knowing the powerful but keeping to powerless
为天下G，like you are in the dale of the world.
为天下G，If you feel the sufferings of the lowest class,
常德不离，the Tao will not mislead you.
复归于婴儿，and you think things directly as a little baby.

知其白守其黑，Knowing the light but keeping in the darkness
为天下式，is a formula of the world.
为天下式，If you know that rule,
常德不忒，the Tao is almost there
复归于无极，and you consider things from the origin.

知其荣守其辱，Knowing the honorable but keeping the ignoble
为天下谷，like you are in the valley of the world.
为天下谷，If you are humble to everything,
常德乃足，the Tao is ample
复归于朴，and you look on things of their innate capacities.

朴散则为器，Every creation in nature is useable,
圣人用之，The Master uses the things fittingly
则为官长，and administers the world wisely.
故大制不割，Great system can't be separated.

Chapter 29

将欲取天下而为之，Someone wants to rule the world with force?
吾见其不得已，I don't think it can be done.

天下神器，The world is sacred.
不可为也，It cannot be controlled.
为者败之，Who forcing will be defeated.
执者失之，Who coercing will be ruined.

故物或行若随，Someone wants to lead and others to follow.
或[或吹，Someone likes pressing and others relaxed.
或强或羸，Someone is strong and others weak.
或挫或隳，Someone is protected and others dilapidated. 

是以圣人，The Master accepts things as they are,
去甚去奢去泰，avoiding extravagance excess and the extremes.

Chapter 30

以道佐人主者，Those kings who following the Tao
不以兵强天下，don't use weapons to enforce their will.
其事好还，Using force always leads to revenge.

师之所处，In the places where armies stay,
荆棘生焉，the lands are desolate and thorns grow.
大军之后，After armies start to war,
必有凶年，famine years always come.

善有果而已，A satisfied result must have a good reason,
不敢以取强，it can't be got by force.
果而勿矜，On victory day you should not be conceited.
果而勿伐，On victory day you should not be boasting.
果而勿骄，On victory day you should not be pompous.
果而不得已，The victory is achieved naturally.
果而勿强，The victory can't be taken by force.

物壮则老，Things on the zenith begin to descend.
是谓不道，This is not the way of Tao.
不道早已，Those not following the Tao will soon end.

Chapter 31

夫佳兵者不祥之器，The good weapons are ominous,
物或恶之，which may be despised by the Universe.
故有道者不处，So people following the Tao will not have them.

君子居而贵左，The gentlemen prefer sitting on the left position.
用兵则贵右，The generals prefer sitting on the right position.
兵者不祥之器，Weapons are meant for destruction,
非君子之器，and thus are shunned by the gentlemen.
不得已而用之，They are used only as the last resort,
恬淡为上，with propaganda restrained.

胜而不美，The victories of wars should not be praised.
而美之者，Who ecstatic of the victories,
是乐杀人，are willing to kill people.
夫乐杀人者，Who willing to kill people,
则不可得志于天下矣，can't be put on a high level to dominate the world.

吉事尚左，The happy events prefer arranging on the left position.
凶事尚右，The funerals prefer arranging on the right position.
偏将军居左，The lieutenants take the left side to prepare for war,
上将军居右，and the generals on the right side,
言以丧礼处之，because the consequence of wars would be funerals and death.

杀人之众，The armies who slaughtered
以哀悲泣之，should be met with tears and sorrows.
战胜，Even the wars won,
以丧礼处之，should be greeted as funerals.

Chapter 32

道常无名，The Tao is nameless and pristine.
朴虽小，Seeming insignificant,
天下莫能臣也，it is the One which control the world.

侯王若能守之，If a king follows its principles,
万物将自宾，the people will accept him willingly.
天地相合，That is like the water vaporing from Earth and condensing in Heaven.
以降甘露，Sweet raindrops fall.
民莫之令而自均，It falls evenly without people's order.

始制有名，Naming is necessary after chaos.
名亦既有，Since the universe has its name,
夫亦将知止，it will have its boundary inevitably.
知止可以不殆，Knowing its limitation will realize its dangers.
譬道之在天下，All things end in the Tao
犹川谷之与江海，just like the streams flowing through valleys to the sea.

Chapter 33

知人者智，Those who share others' feeling are called empathy.
自知者明，Those who know themselves are called wise.
胜人者有力，Those who master others are called powerful.
自胜者强，Those who defeat own weaknesses are called strong.
知足者富，Those who content what they have are called wealthy.
强行者有志，Those who persist their goals are called ambitious.
不失其所者久，Those who keep the rules in mind are called enduring.
死而不亡者寿，Those who being remembered after death are called everlasting.

Chapter 34

大道泛兮，The great Tao is everywhere.
其可左右，It may meander left or right.
万物恃之以生而不辞，It create things diligently and every things rely on it.
功成不名有，It accomplishes without occupying.

衣养万物而不为主，Not claiming the world which it nurtures
可名于小，may be a easy thing.
万物归焉而不为主，Not claiming the world which every things willing to server
可名为大，is a great merit.
以其终不自为大，Because it does not want to be a controller，
故能成其大，it is deemed the Greatness.

Chapter 35

执大象，The place where embodies the Tao
天下往，will attract everyone to come.
往而不害，Coming to the place will not be dangerous,
安平太，because the Tao is peaceful and tranquil.

乐与饵，In the taverns full of music and food,
过客止，a lot of people may stop travelling.

道之出口，Because people in the place of the Tao
淡乎其无味，talk boringly and stalely.
视之不足见，The view of the Tao is not magnificent.
听之不足闻，The sound of the Tao is not sweet.
用之不足既，The rule of the Tao can't provide details.

Chapter 36

将欲歙之，If you want something to close,
必固张之，you must first open it.
将欲弱之，If you want something to weaken,
必固强之，you must first strengthen it.
将欲废之，If you want something to be abolished,
必固兴之，you must first flourish it.
将欲夺之，If you want to something to be seized.
必固与之，you must first give it away.

是谓微明，This is called the subtle wise.
柔弱胜刚强，The soft and pliable overcomes the hard and inflexible.

鱼不可脱于渊，Just as fishes remain hidden in deep waters,
国之利器不可以示人，or as weapons of the country can't be showy.

Chapter 37

道常无为而无不为，The Tao lives everywhere without force.
侯王若能守之，If a king could follow the way of the Tao,
万物将自化，every things in his kingdom will develop naturally.
化而欲作，If any desire were uncontrollable in development,
吾将镇之以无名之朴，I would counter them with its innate factors.

无名之朴，By activating the innate personality,
夫亦将无欲，the turmoil will appease.
不欲以静，keeping less desire and more calmness,
天下将自定，the world would automatically settle into peace.

Chapter 38
#道(Tao)->德(Virtue)->仁(Charity)->义(Integrity)->礼(Law)

上德不德，The real virtuous person doesn't show his merits.
是以有德，That is called Virtue.
下德不失德，The normal virtuous person does good things and boasts.
是以无德，That can't be called Virtue.

上德无为而无以为，The real virtuous king runs the country without force.
下德为之而有以为，The normal virtuous king runs the country with detail rules.

上仁为之而无以为，The charitable person does things from the heart.
上义为之而有以为，The righteous person does things winning others praises.
上礼为之而莫之应，The law-abiding person does things right without response.
则攘臂而扔之，He will roll up his sleeves and ask others to obey his commands.

故失道而后德，So losing the Tao we call for the Virtue.
失德而后仁，Losing the Virtue we call for the Charity.
失仁而后义，Losing the Charity we call for the Integrity.
失义而后礼，Losing the Integrity we call for the Law.

夫礼者，The Law,
忠信之薄，which represents the thin layer of loyalty and faithfulness,
而乱之首，is the beginning of disorders.
前识者，The prophets,
道之华，who exhibit the grand of the Tao,
而愚之始，are the beginning of misunderstanding.

是以大丈夫处其厚，So the master follows the essence of the Tao,
不居其薄，and doesn't be restrained by the shallow outline.
处其实，The master holds the core beliefs of the Tao,
不居其华，and doesn't be bewildered by its grandeur.
故去彼取此，She compares and chooses the right way.

Chapter 39

昔之得一者，These are early masters who discovered their own Tao.
天得一以清，The sky got the Tao and was clear.
地得一以宁，The earth got the Tao and was stable.
神得一以灵，The humans got the Tao and became mystical.
谷得一以盈，The crops got the Tao and were abundant.
万物得一以生，Creatures got the Tao and thrived.
侯王得一以为天下贞，Kings got the Tao and became leaders.

其致之，Those are deductive.
天无以清将恐裂，The sky would be cracked if it were not clear.
地无以宁将恐发，The earth would be erupted if it were not stable.
神无以灵将恐歇，The humans would be extinct if they were not mystical.
谷无以盈将恐竭，The crops would be exterminated if they were not abundant.
万物无以生将恐灭，Creatures would be vanished if they were not thriving.
侯王无以贵高将恐蹶，Kings would tumble if they didn't hold the high position.

故贵以贱为本，So the Great views the Small as its source,
高以下为基，and the High takes the Low as its foundation.
是以侯王自谓孤寡不Y，Sometime kings may humbly introduced themselves,
此非以贱为本邪，is that saying kings were kind to lower-class?
非乎，No.
故致数舆无舆，Speaking humbly is not the true humble.
不欲ff如玉，You should not be pretentious as shining gems,
珞珞为石，but be as lusterless as common stones.

Chapter 40

反者道之动，Anything that deviates from its nature will be returned by the Tao.
弱者道之用，Anything that is pliable will be suitable to use the Tao.
天下万物生于有，All creations are born from being.
有生于无，Being is born from nonbeing.

Chapter 41

上士闻道，When a genius hears of the Tao,
勤而行之，he will diligently put it into practice.
中士闻道，When a clever person hears of the Tao,
若存若亡，he is dubious.
下士闻道，When a mundane person hears of the Tao,
大笑之，he laughs out loudly at the very idea.
不笑，If he didn't laugh,
不足以为道，it wouldn't be the Tao.

故建言有之，Thus it is said:
明道若昧，Sometimes brightness may seem like darkness.
进道若退，Sometimes advance may seem like retreat.
夷道若h，Sometimes smooth may seem like rough.
上德若谷，The highest virtue may seem insufficient.
大白若辱，The pure white may seem murky.
广德若不足，The virtue is too grand to be seen clearly.
建德若偷，The virtue is developing too slow to be recognized.
质真若渝，The essence is too pristine to be spoiled.
大方无隅，The greatest square may have no corners.
大器晚成，The greatest device may take the longest time to finish.
大音希声，The greatest sound cannot be heard.
大象无形，The greatest image is formless.

道隐无名，The Tao hides in the unnamed.
夫唯道，Only the Tao
善贷且成，is willing to start and good at end.

Chapter 42

道生一，The Tao gave birth to One (Taichi).
一生二，The One gave birth to Two (Yin and Yang).
二生三，The Two gave birth to Three (Heaven Earth Human).
三生万物，The Three gave birth to all of creation.

万物负阴而抱阳，All things carry Yin and Yang.
冲气以为和，Those two are blended into harmony.

人之所恶，What people despises
唯孤寡不b，are orphaned, widowed or poor.
而王公以为称，The nobles take as their titles showing their modesty.

故物或损之而益，The things may be harmed first and be benefited later.
或益之而损，Or may be benefited first and be harmed later.

人之所教，What others taught
我亦教之，is also what I will teach.
强梁者不得其死，The violence should be died out.
吾将以为教父，I think that rule is the baseline.

Chapter 43

天下之至柔，Things the most flexible
驰骋天下之至坚，can run through things the hardest.
无有入无间，As the Formless runs through the Seamless (light or wave?).
吾是以知无为之有益，From that I know the power of the Amorphous.
不言之教，The lesson without words
无为之益，and the power of the Amorphous
天下希及之，are fail to understand in most place.

Chapter 44

名与身孰亲，Which is more important, your honor or your life?
身与货孰多，Which is more valuable, your treasure or your body?
得与亡孰病，Which is more troublesome, penny-pinching or penniless?

是故，Because of that, 
甚爱必大费，Hobbies you love more will spend more.
多藏必厚亡，Money you invest more will lose more.

知足不辱，Content with your possessions avoids dishonor of loss.
知止不殆，Knowing the stopping point will keep you from danger.
可以长久，Those two bring you a long happy life.

Chapter 45

大成若缺，Treat the greatest success as imperfect,
其用不弊，we should not stopped by the victory.
大盈若冲，Treat the greatest accomplishment as empty,
其用不穷，we should not halt by the triumph.

大直若屈，The shortest path may be curved.
大巧若拙，The deftest artisan may be seemed as clumsiness.
大辩若讷，The greatest debater may stammer in normal life.

躁胜寒，You will move when you feel cold.
静胜热，You will still when you feel hot.
清静为天下正，A fair balance is the universal ideal.

Chapter 46

天下有道，When the kings follow the Tao,
却走马以粪，the world is peace and horses used for farming.
天下无道，When the kings don't follow the Tao,
戎马生于郊，horses are bred in outskirts preparing for the war.

祸莫大于不知足，No greater disaster is more than greedy.
咎莫大于欲得，No greater distress is more than ravening.

故知足之足，Whoever knows boundary
常足矣，will be content once and for all.

Chapter 47

不出户，Without opening your door,
知天下，you can know the operations of the whole world.
不窥牖，Without looking out your window,
见天道，you can understand the rules of the Nature.

其出弥远，The more you learn without thinking,
其知弥少，the less you grasp as your own knowledge.

是以圣人不行而知，So the Master knows without leaving,
不见而名，perceives without looking,
不为而成，accomplishes without doing much.

Chapter 48

为学日益，Learn something new every day,
为道日损，digest the knowledge every day,
损之又损，analyze and condense,
以至于无为，do that until you feel comfortable.
无为而无不为，Actual understanding can handle every situations.

取天下常以无事，The world is ruled naturally.
及其有事，If you do that by force,
不足以取天下，it means you are not qualified.

Chapter 49

圣人无常心，The norms used by the Master are changed in circumstance.
以百姓心为心，She guides the people by their own hearts.

善者吾善之，To whom he is good guy she treats him well.
不善者吾亦善之，To who he is bad guy she also treats him well.
德善，This is true goodness.

信者吾信之，To whom he is honest guy she trusts him well.
不信者吾亦信之，To whom he is dishonest guy she also trusts him well.
德信，This is true trust.

圣人在天下，The Master who cares about the world
歙歙为天下浑其心，doesn't show her inclination.
百姓皆注其耳目，People learn from the Master,
圣人皆孩之，and she treats them as her children.

Chapter 50

出生入死，Talking about peoples from birth to death,
生之徒十有三，30% of whom lived to their life expectancies,
死之徒十有三，30% of whom died because of accidents,
人之生，and who could live longer
动之死地，but passed away due to own causes,
亦十有三，were also 30%.
夫何故，Why?
以其生生之厚，Because they care too much for living with excess nutrients.

盖闻善摄生者，I have heard those who cherish lives (the last 10%?)
陆行不遇兕虎，walking safely along the rhinos and tigers,
入军不被甲兵，remaining unharmed in the armies.
兕无所投其角，The rhinos didn't bump them.
虎无所措其爪，The tigers didn't strike them.
兵无所容其刃，The soldiers didn't attack them.
夫何故，Why?
以其无死地， Because they camouflaged and didn't enter the dangerous places.

Chapter 51

道生之，All creatures were given birth by the Tao.
德畜之，They were nurtured by the Virtue of the Tao.
物形之，They were formed by their genres.
势成之，They were put in different environments.
是以万物莫不尊道而贵德，That is the reason they honor the Tao and the Virtue.

道之尊，The grandeur of the Tao,
德之贵，The majesty of the Virtue,
夫莫之命而常自然，are not ordered but from nature.

故道生之，So the Tao gives them birth,
德畜之，and the Virtue nurtures them.
长之育之，These Two raise and cultivate,
亭之毒之，grow and mature,
养之覆之，develop and protect.

生而不有，Giving without possessing,
为而不恃，doing without controlling,
长而不宰，advancing without dominating,
是谓玄德，This is called the greatest Virtue.

Chapter 52

天下有始，The world had a beginning.
以为天下母，It is the source of protocols of all the creatures.
既得其母，Once we had the protocols,
以知其子，we could know the objects should be.

既知其子，If we had known the objects,
复守其母，we could conclude the protocols.
没身不殆，Maintaining protocols will protect us from dangers.

塞其兑，Keeping yourself away from desires,
闭其门，and embracing a simple life,
终身不勤，you will live relaxed without troubles.
开其兑，Opening yourself to the desires,
济其事，and pursuing the ambitions,
终身不救，you will live exhausting with troubles.

见小曰明，Understanding the details is called clarity.
守柔曰强，Knowing how to yield is called strength.
用其光，Using your inner light,
复归其明，returning to the intelligent mind,
无遗身殃，will not harm your body.
是为习常，That is the constant rule of the Tao.

Chapter 53

使我介然有知，As my humble understanding,
行于大道，who follows the Tao
唯施是畏，only fears walking on the side path.
大道甚夷，Although the Tao likes a wide road,
而民好径，people prefer taking the shortcuts.

朝甚除，The government corrupt,
田甚芜，the land stark,
仓甚虚，the storeroom empty,
服文彩，but the nobles who dressed in beautiful clothing,
带利剑，wore sharp sword,
厌饮食，ate delicious food,
财货有馀，still foraged the treasures.
是谓盗夸，That is called the crime of excess.
非道也哉，It is not the way of the Tao.

Chapter 54

善建者不拔，The good mason will build layer by layer.
善抱者不脱，The good discipliner will stick to the rules.
子孙以祭祀不辍，The good descendants will obey the ancestors' sayings.

修之于身，When the Tao be used in yourself,
其德乃真，Its virtue is to be true to yourself.
修之于家，When the Tao be used to your family,
其德乃馀，Its virtue is to get enough suppliers for them.
修之于乡，When the Tao be used to the community,
其德乃长，Its virtue is to increase the numbers.
修之于国，When the Tao be used to the country,
其德乃丰，Its virtue is to let the country richer.
修之于天下，When the Tao be used to the world,
其德乃普，Its virtue is to let everyone live an average life.

故以身观身，So observe the person for what he does,
以家观家，observe the family for what it runs,
以乡观乡，observe the community for what it operates,
以国观国，observe the country for what it governs,
以天下观天下，observe the world for what it shows.

吾何以知天下之然哉，How do I know the world?
以此，I observe and see.

Chapter 55

含德之厚，The one embracing the Tao
比于赤子，is like a newborn baby,
蜂虿虺蛇不螫，who will not be stung by insects,
猛兽不据，not be grabbed by wild beasts,
攫鸟不搏，not be seized by falcons.
骨弱筋柔而握固，The baby's grip is firm despite his soft bones.
未知牝牡之合而全作，His penis is erect despite his immatureness.
精之至也，That embodies the energy.
终日号而不嗄，He can cry all day and never hoarse.
和之至也，That embodies the harmony.

知和曰常，Understand harmony and maintain it.
知常曰明，Maintain harmony and enlighten yourself.
益生曰祥，Unnaturally caring yourself is inappropriate .
心使气曰强，Unnaturally running by desires is burdensome.

物壮则老，Things going to the apex will decline.
是谓不道，That is not what the Tao approved.
不道早已，Not approved by the Tao may go to the end earlier.

Chapter 56

知者不言，Those who know do not talk a lot.
言者不知，Those who talk do not know a lot.

塞其兑，Keep away from desires,
闭其门，shun the cravings,
挫其锐，blunt your sharpness,
解其分，release your worries,
和其光，humble your prides,
同其尘，and consider yourself as commonplace.
是谓玄同，Doing that is called the mysterious entity.

故不可得而亲，She would not unnaturally be amicable
不可得而疏，She would not unnaturally be alienated.
不可得而利，She would not unnaturally be beneficial.
不可得而害，She would not unnaturally be harmful.
不可得而贵，She would not unnaturally be noble.
不可得而贱，She would not unnaturally be poor.
故为天下贵，She is herself and respected by the world.

Chapter 57

以正治国，Govern the country by direct rules.
以奇用兵，Lead the war by camouflaged schemes.
以无事取天下，Win the trust of the world by stability.
吾何以知其然哉，How do I know those?
以此，By these:

天下多忌讳，The more prohibitions are
而民弥贫，in company with the poorer people.
民多利器，The more weapons are
国家滋昏，in company with the greater chaos in the country.
人多伎巧，The more technologies are,
奇物滋起，in company with the stranger objects.
法令滋彰，The more laws are,
盗贼多有，in company with the more criminals.

故圣人云，Therefore the Master says:
我无为而民自化，I do nothing and people will find the way themselves.
我好静而民自正，I stay peace and people will take care themselves.
我无事而民自富，I leave alone and people will trade themselves.
我无欲而民自朴，I restrain and people will know their innate characters.

Chapter 58

其政闷闷，If the policies are lenient,
其民淳淳，people will be unsophisticated.
其政察察，If the policies are full of particulars,
其民缺缺，people will be irritable.

祸兮福之所倚，Misfortune may be caused by fortune.
福兮祸之所伏，Fortune may be caused by misfortune.
孰知其极，Who knows the edge of the changes?
其无正，It doesn't have a standard.
正复为奇，Good may be changed into bad.
善复为妖，Advantage may be changed into disadvantage.
人之迷，People confusing about that transformation
其日固久，have last a long time.

是以圣人方而不割，Thus the Master is righteous not stubborn.
廉而不刿，She is uprightness not headstrong.
直而不肆，She is straightforward not unbridled.
光而不耀，She is bright not shinning.

Chapter 59

治人事天，Governing a country or treating yourself
莫若啬，is nothing better than maintenance.
夫唯啬，Those who know maintenance
是谓早服，will do the preparation early.

早服，Those who do the preparation early
谓之重积德，will accumulate an increasing number of virtues.
重积德，Those who own a great number of virtues
则无不克，will solve any problems.
无不克，Those who can solve any problems
则莫知其极，will get unconquerable souls.
莫知其极，Those who have unconquerable souls
可以有国，will govern the country responsibly.
有国之母，Using this theory to govern the country
可以长久，will last a long time.

是谓深根固柢，This is said that deep root and firm trunk
长生久视之道，are the way of the Tao to a longer life.

Chapter 60

治大国，Governing a large country
若烹小鲜，is like frying a small fish gradually.

以道莅天下，When the world is governed by the Tao,
其鬼不神，the rebels cannot exhibit their power.
非其鬼不神，Not because the rebels don't have power,
其神不伤人，their power can't affect the people.
非其神不伤人，Not only the rebels not affecting the people,
圣人亦不伤人，the Master also doesn't meddle the people.

夫两不相伤，If you leave people to their own devices,
故德交归焉，the Virtue will merge and show harmony.

Chapter 61

大国者下流，The powerful country should act like rivers flowing downward,
天下之交，which converge at the downstream regions,
天下之牝，which sound calm and serene.
牝常以静胜牡，The female power bridles the male's by her peacefulness.
以静为下，She takes the lower position intending for peace.

故大国以下小国，If a powerful country shows modesty to a small country,
则取小国，It will win the heart of people in small country.
小国以下大国，If a small country shows respect to a powerful country,
则取大国，It will gain the favor of people in powerful country.
故或下以取，So some countries want obedience,
或下而取，some countries want acceptance.
大国不过欲兼畜人，Large countries merely want to be dominator.
小国不过欲入事人，Small countries merely want to be subordinate.
夫两者各得其所欲，Both large and small countries want to accomplish the mission,
大者宜为下，large countries should hold out the olive branch first.

Chapter 62

道者万物之奥，The Tao is the sanctuary of creations.
善人之宝，It is an oasis for good men.
不善人之所保，also a shelter for bad guys.

美言可以市，Platitude may be exchanged by the hypocrites.
尊行可以加人，Respect can be earned by good behaviors.
人之不善，Whoever good men or bad guys
何弃之有，should not depart from the Tao.

故立天子，Being a king
置三公，or occupying a high-level position
虽有拱璧以先驷马，may be rich and enjoy a privilege,
不如坐进此道，but not so important as following the Tao.

古之所以贵此道者何，Why do we think highly of the Tao?
不曰求以得，Don't we pray for good results after pursuing.
有罪以名邪，Don't we pray for forgiveness after transgressing.
故为天下贵，That is why the Tao is esteemed by the world.

Chapter 63

为无为，Doing things naturally.
事无事，Solving problems concentratedly.
味无味，Tasting savory gradually.
大小多少，The big starts from the small and more from less.
报怨以德，Return hatred with kindness.

图难于其易，Handle the hard problem from the easy part.
为大于其细，Accomplish the great goal from the small scale.

天下难事，Difficult tasks in the world
必作于易，are best addressed from an easy target.
天下大事，Great projects in the world
必作为细，are best started from a small piece.
是以圣人终不为大，The Master never does more than she can handle.
故能成其大，She becomes the master little by little.

夫轻诺必寡信，Someone consents too quickly must dissent later.
多易必多难，Something begins too easy must be hard later.
是以圣人犹难之，The Master treats everything as burdensome,
故终无难矣，thus the task is carefully planned and develops smoothly.

Chapter 64

其安易持，The situation is easier to control when stable.
其未兆易谋，The scheme is easier to plan beforehand.
其脆易泮，The material is easier to break if fragile.
其微易散，The substance is easier to scatter if small.
为之于未有，Prevent hardships before they arise.
治之于未敌，Take action before things uncontrollable.

合抱之木，The stoutest tree
生于毫末，begins as a tiny sprout.
九层之台，The tallest building
起于累土，starts with a shovel of dirt.
千里之行，The longest journey
始于足下，begins with a single step.

为者败之，You will fail if acting against the nature.
执者失之，You will lose if aiming the wrong target.

是以圣人无为故无败，So the Master lets things take their courses and never fails.
无执故无失，She knows what she can do and never loses.
民之从事，The mortals who do things
常于几成而败之，may fail at the time almost succeed.
慎终如始，Being vigilant at the end as well as the beginning,
则无败事，you will not go astray.

是以圣人欲不欲，Thus the master seeks what mortals don't seek.
不贵难得之货，She doesn't care much about the treasures.
学不学，The master studies what mortals don't study.
复众人之所过，She remedies others' mistakes.
以辅万物之自然，She guides all creations back to their natures.
而不敢为，She doesn't overstep.

Chapter 65

古之善为道者，The ancient prophets who followed the Tao
非以明民，didn't think highly of themselves than the mortals,
将以愚之，but kept a low profile.

民之难治，People are hard to be governed,
以其智多，because the leader has too much ideas.
故以智治国，So using the king's autocratic thoughts to rule a country
国之贼，will damage the country.
不以智治国，Avoiding dictatorship of the leader's own intelligence,
国之福，will prosper the country.

知此两者亦稽式，Knowing the two terms is a standard of a leader.
常知稽式，Remaining aware of the standard
是谓玄德，is the Virtue.
玄德深矣远矣，The Virtue is mysterious and profound.
与物反矣，It is opposite to our natural inclination,
然后乃至大顺，but leads to the harmony.

Chapter 66

江海所以能为百谷王者，Seas are called the kings of all rivers,
以其善下之，because rivers are flowing to the seas.
故能为百谷王，So seas are called kings of the rivers.

是以欲上民，If you want to be a leader,
必以言下之，you must speak sincerely and humbly.
欲先民，If you want to be a leader,
必以身后之，you must put your own interest behind.

是以圣人处上，So the Master is the leader,
而民不重，people will not feel burdened.
处前，The Master is the leader,
而民不害，people will not fear their interests been impaired.

是以天下乐推而不厌，People will gladly ask for her guidance,
以其不争，for she doesn't care for her own interest,
故天下莫能与之争，thus no one can defeat her.

Chapter 67

天下皆谓我道大，People praise the Tao for its greatness,
似不肖，but you can't find this in slices of life.
夫唯大，Because of its greatness,
故似不肖，we can't think anything been it.
若肖久矣，If any creation was said similar to this,
其细也夫，It should be detailed concept but not the Tao.

我有三宝，I have three jewels about the Tao
持而保之，and keep them carefully.
一曰慈，One is compassion.
二曰俭，Two is moderation.
三曰不敢为天下先，Three is humility.

慈故能勇，You will be brave with compassion.
俭故能广，You can be charitable with moderation.
不敢为天下先，If you are humble,
故能成器长，you will take a good walk of life.

今舍慈且勇，Brave without compassion,
舍俭且广，charitable without moderation
舍后且先，pride without humility
死矣，would lead to greater troubles.

夫慈，Talk about compassion:
以战则胜，The compassionate warrior will win the war.
以守则固，The compassionate defender will protect the home.
天将救之，If the Heaven wanted to save you,
以慈卫之，you should be compassionate to yourself.

Chapter 68

善为士者不武，The best warrior doesn't show his strength easily.
善战者不怒，The best general doesn't get irritated.
善胜敌者不与，The best tactician doesn't battle directly.
善用人者为之下，The best leader is humble to people.

是谓不争之德，This is called the virtue of no fighting.
是谓用人之力，This is called the skill of succeeding at work.
是谓配天古之极，This is called the harmony with the Heavens.

Chapter 69

用兵有言，There is an old saying about military:
吾不敢为主而为客，"We can't be stubborn but adaptable to the environment.
不敢进寸而退尺，We shouldn't care much about local victory but total."

是谓行无行，This is called flexible march route,
攘无臂，pushing forward without exerting excessively,
扔无敌，preparing for ambush before the enemy coming,
执无兵，destroying the enemy without showing muscle.
祸莫大于轻敌，There is no greater disaster than underestimating your enemy.
轻敌几丧吾宝，Underestimating the enemy means deviating the Tao.

故抗兵相加，So equal forces meet in battle,
哀者胜矣，the one with compassion will win.

Chapter 70

吾言甚易知，My words are easy to understand
甚易行，and easy to practice.
天下莫能知，Yet no one in the world really understand
莫能行，and put into practice.

言有宗，My teachings have the themes.
事有君，My activities have the precedence.

夫唯无知，Because you do not know me,
是以不我知，you don't understand my teachings.
知我者希，Those who know me are few.
则我者贵，Those who follow me are fewer.
是以圣人被褐怀玉，Thus the Master is like the silver goblet with patina.

Chapter 71

知不知上，Knowing your limitation is good.
不知知病，Not knowing your limitation is unfavorable.
夫唯病病，Only by knowing your weaknesses,
是以不病，can you find ways to minimize their impact.

圣人不病，The Master doesn't have weaknesses,
以其病病，because she is willing to face up to her weaknesses,
是以不病，and thus we say she doesn't have actual weaknesses.

Chapter 72

民不畏威，When people don't fear oppressive governments,
则大威至，rebellions will soon arrive.

无狎其所居，Don't ruin people's homes.
无厌其所生，Don't destroy people's lives.
夫唯不厌，If the king didn't oppress people,
是以不厌，people would not hate the king.

是以圣人自知不自见，Thus the Master knows herself and not arrogant.
自爱不自贵，She loves herself and not excessive pride .
故去彼取此，She chooses the former and declines the latter.

Chapter 73

勇于敢则杀，Someone is brave to battle and die.
勇于不敢则活，Someone is brave to endure suffering and live.

此两者，These two,
或利或害，one is stopping living and the other is remaining alive.
天之所恶，Which way is the choice of the Heaven?
孰知其故，And why choose the way?
是以圣人犹难之，The Master also can't say clearly.

天之道，The Tao of the nature is,
不争而善胜，winning without combating,
不言而善应，responding without saying,
不召而自来，coming without calling,
A然而善谋，unperturbed and deliberate.

天网恢恢，The nature is like a wide mesh,
疏而不失，which may have spaces in between but is a great barrier.

Chapter 74

民不畏死，If people didn't fear death,
奈何以死惧之，they would not be intimidated.
若使民常畏死，If people do fear death,
而为奇者，when seeing the one who hurts others
吾得执而杀之，been killed by the king,
孰敢，they will not dare to go wrong.

常有司杀者杀，There is the judicial power in the universe.
夫代司杀者杀，But if anyone kills others for any reasons,
是谓代大匠斫，it is hypocritical justice.
夫代大匠斫者，The killer who thinks himself on behalf of justice,
希有不伤其手矣，is scarcely not regrettable and self-harming later.

Chapter 75

民之饥，The people are hungry,
以其上食税之多，because they pay too much taxes to the governments..
是以饥，The left money can't sustain life so people are hungry.

民之难治，The people are rebellious,
以其上之有为，because the government control everything.
是以难治，Freedom is needed so people are disobedient.

民之轻死，The people don't care about own death,
以其上求生之厚，because higher ranks grasp too much.
是以轻死，The lower class can't rise so people don't cherish their lives. 

夫唯无以生为者，Those who prudent and economical
是贤于贵生，are better than those who extravagant.

Chapter 76

人之生也柔弱，The living bodies are soft and yielding.
其死也坚强，The dead bodies are rigid and stiff.
万物草木之生也柔脆，The living plants are flexible and tender.
其死也枯槁，The dead plants are brittle and dry.

故坚强者死之徒，So the stiff and rigid represent the Death.
柔弱者生之徒，The soft and yielding represent the Life.

是以兵强则不胜，Thus a strong army too combative will be defeated finally.
木强则兵，A huge tree too glorious will be cut into materials.
强大处下，The powerful ones should be humble and modest.
柔弱处上，The compatible ones can be coordinators.

Chapter 77

天之道，The Tao of Heaven works in the world
其犹张弓与，like shooting a bow.
高者抑之，Move your draw hand up if the aim is high.
下者举之，Move your draw hand down if the aim is low.
有馀者损之，The excess is taken from.
不足者补之，The dearth is given to.

天之道，The Tao of Heaven
损有馀而补不足，takes from the rich and gives to the poor.

人之道，The operations of human society,
则不然，which is different with the Tao,
损不足以奉有馀，take from the poor and give to the rich.

孰能有馀以奉天下，Who can execute the egalitarian principles?
唯有道者，Only the people who follows the Tao.
是以圣人为而不恃，So the Master works without controlling,
功成而不处，accomplishes without taking credits.
其不欲见贤，She doesn't want to show her glory.

Chapter 78

天下莫柔弱于水，Water is the softest and most yielding substance.
而攻坚强者莫之能胜，Yet nothing hard and rigid can prevail over water.
以其无以易之，For nothing can change water properties.

弱之胜强，The weak is more viable than the strong.
柔之用刚，The tender is more durable than the hard.
天下莫不知，Everyone in the world knows the facts.
莫能行，But few can put this knowledge into practice.

是以圣人云，Therefore the Master says:
受国之垢，"He who accepts the blames from people in the kingdom,
是谓社稷主，is worthy to be the ruler.
受国不祥，He who is willing to take the responsibility of the kingdom,
是谓天下王，is the king of the world."

正言若反，True sayings seem contradictory.

Chapter 79

和大怨，Release a deep resentment,
必有馀怨，unhappiness still remains.
安可以为善，Basic reconciliation can't deem good.

是以圣人执左契，Thus the Master acts as the vendor with debit note
而不责于人，who doesn't ask the buyer to pay the obligations immediately.
有德司契，A righteous person is lenient like holding the debit note.
无德司彻，A disagreeable person is merciless like asking for tax.

天道无亲，The Tao does not choose sides.
常与善人，A good man lives well because of his doing himself.

Chapter 80

小国寡民，Governing a country is a part to whole strategy.
使有什伯之器而不用，Choose the most suitable tools from variable items.
使民重死而不远徙，Cherish life and not risk to migrate.

虽有舟舆，Having wagons and boats,
无所乘之，no need to use.
虽有甲兵，Having weapons and shields,
无所陈之，no need to fight.

使人复结绳而用之，Let people enjoy the simple technologies,
甘其食，enjoy their own food,
美其服，enjoy their own clothes,
安其居，content with their own homes,
乐其欲，and happy with their own conventions.

邻国相望，Even another country is as close as
鸡犬之声相闻，hearing their roosters crowing and dogs barking,
民至老死不相往来，people will not move if they are pleased.

Chapter 81

信言不美，True words are not happy to hear.
美言不信，Flattering words are not trustworthy.
善者不辩，Big picture people don't waste time on arguing.
辩者不善，Quarrelsome people don't make life cheerful.
知者不博，Wise men are not flamboyant.
博者不知，Conspicuous men are not wise.

圣人不积，The Master isn't selfish.
既以为人，The more she does for the people,
已愈有，the happier she feels.
既以与人，The more she gives to others,
已愈多，the more spiritual content she is.

天之道，The Tao of Heaven
利而不害，is benevolence not brutal force.
圣人之道，The Tao of the Master
为而不争，is collaboration not competition.